---
title: "The University of Washington Ice-Liquid Discriminator (UWILD) improves single particle phase classifications of hydrometeors within Southern Ocean clouds using machine learning"
date: 2021-05-21
tags: [Random Forest, Amospheric Sciences, Binary Classification, Machine Learning]
excerpt: "May 21 2021: Classifying Partical Phase with Random Forests"
mathjax: "true"
---
<p>
Paper published in Atmospheric Measurement Techniques based on research with University of Washington Department of Atmospheric Sciences.
Abstract below:

Mixed-phase Southern Ocean clouds are challenging to simulate and their representation in climate models is an
important control on climate sensitivity. In particular, the amount of supercooled liquid and frozen mass that they contain
in the present climate is a predictor of their planetary feedback in a warming climate. The recent Southern Ocean Clouds,
Radiation and Aerosol Transport Experimental Study (SOCRATES) vastly increased the amount of in-situ data available from
5 mixed-phase Southern Ocean clouds useful for model evaluation. Bulk measurements distinguishing liquid and ice water
content are not available from SOCRATES so single particle phase classifications from the Two-Dimensional Stereo (2D-S)
probe are invaluable for quantifying mixed-phase cloud properties. Motivated by the presence of large biases in existing phase
discrimination algorithms, we develop a novel technique for single particle phase classification of binary 2D-S images using a
random forest algorithm, which we refer to as the University of Washington Ice-Liquid Discriminator (UWILD). UWILD uses
10 14 parameters computed from binary image data, as well as particle inter-arrival time, to predict phase. We use liquid-only
and ice-dominated time periods within the SOCRATES dataset as training and testing data. This novel approach to model
training avoids major pitfalls associated with using manually labelled data, including reduced model generalizability and high
labor costs. We find that UWILD is well calibrated and has an overall accuracy of 95% compared to 72% and 78% for two
existing phase classification algorithms that we compare it with. UWILD improves classifications of small ice crystals and large
15 liquid drops in particular and has more flexibility than the other algorithms to identify both liquid-dominated and ice-dominated
regions within the SOCRATES dataset. UWILD misclassifies a small percentage of large liquid drops as ice. Such misclassified
particles are typically associated with model confidence below 75% and can easily be filtered out of the dataset. UWILD phase
classifications show that particles with area-equivalent diameter (Deq) < 0.17 mm are mostly liquid at all temperatures sampled,
down to -40◦C. Larger particles (Deq > 0.17 mm) are predominantly frozen at all temperatures below 0◦C. Between 0◦C and
5◦C, there are roughly equal numbers of frozen and liquid mid-size particles (0.17 < Deq < 0.33 mm) and larger particles (Deq
> 0.33 mm) are mostly frozen. We also use UWILD’s phase classifications to estimate sub 1-Hz phase heterogeneity and we
show examples of meter-scale cloud phase heterogeneity in the SOCRATES dataset.


Paper can be read <a href="https://amt.copernicus.org/preprints/amt-2021-123/amt-2021-123.pdf">here</a>.</p>
    </embed>
</object>

